---
key: 2
title: About me
permalink: /aboutme/
excerpt: Decades in a blur.
image: bw_headshot.jpg
background-image: banner.jpg
---

<hr />
My name is Kyle Archie. I’m an inventor and an engineer who uses a multidisciplinary approach to solve tough problems, though my specialty is grounded in machine learning.
<hr />

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/cornell.jpg" %}
I’m a graduate of the same engineering program as Bill Nye the Science Guy; the Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Cornell University. This was a fantastic program, and I highly recommend checking it out if you’re looking for either an undergraduate or graduate engineering program. The Sibley School, and Cornell’s Engineering College as a whole, really try to give you a holistic education; everyone learns a little bit about everything. We took numerous programming courses in Java and used MATLAB in just about every high level class. We took technical classes covering all subjects from chemistry to circuit design, and we were required to take at least two semesters of writing, another semester of technical writing, and six semesters of liberal arts. I chose to focus on philosophy and cognitive science, which helped develop my broader problem solving ability. This sort of broad curriculum lines up extremely well with the latest findings in neuroscience, which suggest that the best way to excel in particular field isn’t to just dive super deep, but to learn about other, potentially unrelated subjects as well, so you can apply principles from elsewhere to problems in your own field and come up with more creative solutions in general.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/submarine.jpg" %}
Anyway, my undergraduate degree originally led me to get a structural engineering job at Electric Boat designing nuclear submarines. However, as cool as “designing” nuclear submarines sounded, the reality of the situation was that I was a glorified checker of other people's work. Often at these larger companies, draftsmen do the design work while engineers simply perform analysis on those designs to ensure they work correctly. This was a pretty disappointing first experience out of school.

So, I returned to Cornell to get a master’s degree. During orientation, I learned about a brand new multidisciplinary graduate program for “Systems Engineering,” Now, it’s important to note here that this is not to be confused with the more prevalent “network systems engineer” IT profession, which hadn’t yet risen to dominate the job boards when this was created. The original “Systems Engineering” role was actually quite old… dating back to Bell Labs in the 1940s, and gaining popularity during the space race in the 1960s. You can read more about it [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_engineering).

Essentially, this program would teach me how to manage the design and construction of extremely complex systems, which is exactly what I had originally been hoping I would be doing at Electric Boat. I was hooked and spent the next year working pretty insane hours and pulling more all-nighters than at any other time in my life. But it was totally worth it, and it was extremely interesting stuff. I learned project management from a sociologist and system modeling from the engineer who overhauled and optimize Harley Davidson’s entire business operation. I took a class on how to use optimization algorithms to design more efficient mechanical systems, and another class on how to design feedback control systems for virtually any type of device, just to name a few. And I got to actually design and build a submarine, leading the mechanical engineering team for the university’s Autonomous Underwater Vehicle team. The team leader had very ambitious goal of doing a complete redesign and rebuild that year, which hadn’t been done for several years prior. It was a fantastic experience.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/lpd17.jpg" %}
After graduating, I moved to Washington D.C. and got a job as a Systems Engineer with a consulting company called VisiTech, Ltd. This job was the complete opposite of what I experienced at Electric Boat. I was able to use all the skills I’d just fought so hard to acquire during my masters, and I got to work with some extremely smart people, helping to design a deca-million dollar simulation for the U.S. Navy intended to help them offset a huge portion of the costs of conducting live fire exercises with simulations of various attacks and responses. It was interesting, I learned huge amount about how to model 3D physical environments, and I had the opportunity to present at a wargaming conference at Annapolis. While the project was classified, here is [a public facing slide deck about it if you’re curious](https://ndiastorage.blob.core.usgovcloudapi.net/ndia/2007/systems/Wednesday/AM/Track2/5553_1004_1148.pdf).

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/varna.jpg" %}
In 2007, I founded Varna Energy Solutions with a good friend of mine from college, whose mission was to leverage the latest technologies to help homeowners reduce their energy consumption. Our original focus was on ground source heat pumps, and after a few months, we were accredited installers, working on our first install.

However, it turns out that 2007-2008 would not be a great time to start a business, especially one focused on the residential building sector. After the financial collapse, we lost a lot of momentum. My partner decided to go on to something else, but I was determined to see things through a bit longer. I actually managed to start growing the business a bit by pivoting away from heat pumps and focusing on the testing and modeling of homes to determine what the most cost effective home improvements might be. Things started to take off a bit... enough so that I hired my first full-time employee (another Cornell engineer) to help manage the load. But the growth eventually stalled. More and more companies started doing "energy audits/assessments," and most offered them as loss leaders (i.e. ways to pitch a sale of their core business). The price competition really started to make me doubt whether the hours were worth the effort, and I didn't see a path forward that would improve matters. I made the incredibly difficult decision to close Varna in late 2009.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/csg.jpg" %}
Luckily for me, the work that I'd done with Varna hadn't gone unnoticed. The company that implemented one of the energy efficiency programs that I had participated in on behalf of the New York State Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) had been really impressed by what I’d been doing, and reached out to recruit me. A month or so later, I found myself working for Conservation Services Group (CSG), later to be acquired by [CLEAResult](https://www.clearesult.com/), the largest consulting company in North America focused on renewables and residential energy efficiency and consumption. If you’ve ever participated in a solar program or a rebate/incentive program for either a utility company or a state / regional government anywhere in North America, there’s a very good chance that program was at least in part designed or operated by CSG or CLEAResult.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/clearesult.png" link="https://www.clearesult.com/" %}
I spent the next seven years working my way through a multitude of different projects and roles, for several different clients. It was a great experience, but I continued to work on my own projects on the side, hoping I might make a breakthrough that would let me try my hand at a startup again.

Now, in the years since I’d shuttered Varna, Machine Learning had really taken off. It seemed like every magazine I picked up and journal article I read was referencing some sort of new algorithm. I’d learned a lot about optimization and modeling in general both in grad school, and at my job with VisiTech, and one of my roommates in graduate school was an early adopter of neural networks, so while I hadn’t yet used one in a project, I was familiar with the concept. And this all sounded right up my alley. So, I decided to start learning more. I found the wealth of information about the subject to be utterly amazing. Back when I was in college, the only place to learn anything meaningful about a complex subject such as this was a college textbook or journal articles you could only access via a university library. But now, you could take the entire Stanford University Computer Science 229 course on Machine Learning for free via [Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning), taught by the world-renowned Andrew Ng. And that wasn’t all. [Google Deepmind](https://deepmind.com/), who is far and away the biggest leader in the field of AI, put out [an entire graduate-level course on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2pWv7GOvuf0) taught by none other than David Silver. And the [textbook](http://incompleteideas.net/book/bookdraft2017nov5.pdf) to go with it could be downloaded for free! And you could find code samples all over GitHub. Clearly, this is a very different era, and the timing of all this couldn’t be better for my own goals.

So I gobbled up everything I could, started applying these algorithms to my own set of problems, and quickly, as I think most people who learn about machine learning’s ability to control complex tasks do, started thinking about how I could use this to manage my stock portfolio. Well, my first stop was my good friend who’d been successfully trading stocks since college. I picked his brain, learned about news sentiment analysis, and built my own custom OpenAI environment for stock trading based both on some of the concepts he’d taught me, and concepts like momentum trading and value investing that I’d learned on via  [Investopia](https://www.investopedia.com/), yet another awesome web resource. 

I quickly fell down the rabbit hole and spent countless hours both learning the latest machine learning algorithms and then applying them to the problem of managing a stock portfolio. By late 2017, I'd made a lot of progress getting a stock recommender working, but I realized that if I really wanted to make this successful, I would need to work this problem full-time. So, I left my senior consulting job with CLEAResult, and dedicated myself to building a fully automated trading platform that intakes thousands of data points every minute and automatically uses those to rebalance a diverse stock portfolio. I was testing this live in parallel with some synchronized live test orders to help me better calculate slippage when the pandemic hit. My system did not handle that huge dip in March 2020 as well as I would have liked. I decided mothball this project for a year or two and focus on another until the market stabilized a bit and I could use the data from the pandemic to help train.

I started working on a three new projects during the pandemic. First, was a hurricane forecasting system that I'd been toying with as a hobby for a while. It uses live weather data along with near real-time satellite imagery to forecast the track of hurricanes using a dedicated neural network. I created a tutorial for accessing certain satellite imagery from NOAA via AWS (available [here](https://registry.opendata.aws/noaa-goes/)), and began talking with NOAA about developing my model into a full-blown system through a grant. 

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/martial.jpg" %}
My second project entailed a martial arts phone app that uses human pose estimation to help coaches and students get the most out of online zoom classes. I built this using Google's MediaPipe library. I found that the z-coordinate of the detected joints in images from this library was far [too inaccurate to be useful](https://github.com/google/mediapipe/issues/1611). I still have confidence in this project's long term viability, but needed to wait for some updates to the core tech to come out for it to become market ready. Google has put out some fixes, and I intend to revisit this project post COVID, provided remote workouts are still a thing.

My third project was to build a platform that can generate personalized children's books using real pictures of your kid, automatically. My daughter loves stories that include her, so it seemed like an obvious product. Once I did a quick search, I found that indeed, there were many companies making personalized children's books. But, as far as I could tell, none of them used photos for anything other than a random one-off picture. I decided to change that.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/nightlight-logo black-social.jpg" %}
By 2021, I'd started working on this idea full-time. I wanted to avoid the mistakes I'd make with Varna, so I focused this business on making the core processes and infrastructure as automated and scalable as possible. I wrote two books, hired an artist to create the background art, learned how to use cloudless architecture to host a scalable machine learning powered system, built and deployed said system, experimented with multiple printing vendors' APIs, sampled their finished products, and incorporated [Slokie LLC](https://slokie.com). The store is currently live and taking orders. It is almost entirely automated, so I'm starting to explore options for a new project while I revisit some of my old ones and decide what's next.

If you a project that you think I'd be a good fit for, then please [reach out](https://slokie.com/pages/contact). I'm open to anything that involves using Machine Learning in a cool new way.
