---
key: 4
title: About me
permalink: /aboutme/
excerpt: An honest telling of my story, with both the good and the bad, for those interested.
image: bw_headshot.jpg
background-image: banner.jpg
---

<hr />
My name is Kyle Archie. I’m an inventor and an engineer who uses a multidisciplinary approach to solve tough problems. How did I get here?

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/cornell.jpg" %}
Well, I’m a graduate of the same engineering program as Bill Nye the Science Guy; the Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Cornell University. This was a fantastic program, and I highly recommend checking it out if you’re looking for either an undergraduate or graduate engineering program. The Sibley School, and Cornell’s Engineering College as a whole, really try to give you a holistic education; everyone learns a little bit about everything. We took numerous programming courses in Java and used MATLAB in just about every high level class. We took technical classes covering all subjects from chemistry to circuit design, and we were required to take at least two semesters of writing, another semester of technical writing, and six semesters of liberal arts. I chose to focus on philosophy and cognitive science, which helped develop my broader problem solving ability. This sort of broad curriculum lines up extremely well with the latest findings in neuroscience, which suggest that the best way to excel in particular field isn’t to just dive super deep, but to learn about other, potentially unrelated subjects as well, so you can apply principles from elsewhere to problems in your own field and come up with more creative solutions in general.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/submarine.jpg" %}
Anyway, my undergraduate degree originally led me to get a structural engineering job at Electric Boat designing nuclear submarines. However, as cool as “designing” nuclear submarines sounded, the reality of the situation was that I was a glorified checker of other people's work. Often at these larger companies, draftsmen do the design work while engineers simply perform analysis on those designs to ensure they work correctly. This was a pretty disappointing first experience out of school.

So, I returned to Cornell to get a master’s degree. During orientation, I learned about a brand new multidisciplinary graduate program for “Systems Engineering,” Now, it’s important to note here that this is not to be confused with the more prevalent “network systems engineer” IT profession, which hadn’t yet risen to dominate the job boards when this was created. The original “Systems Engineering” role was actually quite old… dating back to Bell Labs in the 1940s, and gaining popularity during the the space race in the 1960s. You can read more about it [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_engineering).

Essentially, this program would teach me how to manage the design and construction of extremely complex systems, which is exactly what I had originally been hoping I would be doing at Electric Boat. I was hooked, and spent the next year working pretty insane hours, and pulling more all-nighters than in any other time in my life. But it was totally worth it, and it was extremely interesting stuff. I learned project management from a sociologist. Systems modeling from the engineer that helped lead Harley Davidson’s recovery from the brink of financial disaster. I took a class on how to use optimization algorithms to design more efficient mechanical systems, and another class on how to design feedback control systems for virtually any type of device, just to name a few. And I got to actually design and build a submarine, leading the mechanical engineering team for the university’s Autonomous Underwater Vehicle team. The team leader had very ambitious goal of doing a complete redesign and rebuild that year, which hadn’t been done for several years prior. This involved a tremendous amount of work, especially since there were only three mechanical engineers on the whole team, including myself and one freshman who hadn’t yet learned how to operate any of the key equipment in the machine shop. I remember fabricating a carbon fiber composite body on a vacuum table at 3am one night, and scrambling through all hours of the day and night to fabricate some connector pieces on a mini-mill that I bought with some of the money I made at Electric Boat because there was a huge backlog at the school’s machine shop. I think a full redesign in one year in retrospect was probably a bit overly ambitious, but it was a lot of fun and some great experience, and in the end, we won best in show that year.

My favorite class, however, was a one credit pass/fail colloquium series where some of Cornell’s most successful entrepreneurs would come back and tell their story. Each week featured another self-made multimillionaire, from somebody who invented an artificial heart and a novel way to close bed sores, to another alumni who helped pioneer the video streaming technologies that have led to services like Netflix and Hulu. It was  fascinating hearing their stories, and a common theme quickly emerged. Nearly all these successes were the result of repeated failures. None of the speakers succeeded with their first startup. It wasn’t until their second or even third that they actually made money. The main lesson I learned from them was that if you want to succeed in life, you can’t be afraid to fail.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/lpd17.jpg" %}
After graduating, I followed my girlfriend, now my wife, down to Washington D.C. where she got into her own graduate program. I didn’t yet have a job, but I wasn’t too worried about that, and sure enough, within a few months of arriving, I’d landed a job as a Systems Engineer with a consulting company called VisiTech, Ltd. This job was the complete opposite of what I experienced at Electric Boat. I was able to use all the skills I’d just fought so hard to acquire during my masters, and I got to work with some extremely smart people, helping to design a deca-million dollar simulation for the U.S. Navy intended to help them offset a huge portion of the costs of conducting live fire exercises with simulations of various attacks and responses. It was interesting, I learned huge amount about how to model 3D physical environments, and I had the opportunity to present at a wargaming conference at Annapolis. While the project was classified, here is [a public facing slide deck about it if you’re curious](https://ndiastorage.blob.core.usgovcloudapi.net/ndia/2007/systems/Wednesday/AM/Track2/5553_1004_1148.pdf).

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/varna.jpg" %}
We then decided to head to New York. to try my hand at entrepreneurship, inspired still by that colloquium series. So, I founded Varna Energy Solutions with a good friend of mine from college, whose mission was to leverage the latest technologies to help homeowners reduce their energy consumption. Our original focus was on ground source heat pumps, and after a few months we were accredited installers, working on our first install.

However, it turns out that 2007-2008 would not be a great time to start a business, especially one focused on the residential building sector, so after the financial collapse, we lost a lot of momentum. My partner decided to go on to something else, but I was determined to see things through a bit longer. I actually managed to start growing the business a bit… enough so that I hired my first full-time employee (another Cornell engineer) to help. But, eventually that growth slowed and I realized that the hours I was spending were simply not worth the meager pay I was allocating myself. Most of our revenue was going to my employee, and I simply no longer saw the same market potential I once did. I decided to throw in the towel.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/csg.jpg" %}
This was a really hard time for me. I felt like a failure, and was quite depressed. But, I made myself remember what those other entrepreneurs had told me… their experiences all included failures just like these, and compared to some of their stories, my own really wasn’t that bad. I wasn’t in debt and my sole employee immediately found another job. As an added upside, the company that implemented one of the energy efficiency programs that I had participated in on behalf of the New York State Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) had been really impressed by what I’d been doing, and reached out to recruit me. Well, a month or so later, I found myself working for Conservation Services Group (CSG), later to be acquired by [CLEAResult](https://www.clearesult.com/), the largest consulting company in North America focused on renewables and residential energy efficiency and consumption. If you’ve ever participated in a solar program or a rebate / incentive program for either a utility company or a state / regional government anywhere in North America, there’s a very good chance that program was at least in part designed or operated by CSG or CLEAResult.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/clearesult.png" link="https://www.clearesult.com/" %}
I spent the next eight years working my way through a multitude of different projects and roles, for several different clients. It was great experience, but I continued to work on my own projects on the side, hoping I might make a breakthrough that would let me try my hand at a startup again.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/kite.jpg" link="https://www.clearesult.com/" %}
My first major side project involved building a high altitude wind power generation system. During my honeymoon in Greece, I tried kiteboarding, and I was blown away by the forces that a simple kite could generate. I quickly learned about other projects out there, including Google's Makani, which was actually started by the guy who invented kiteboarding. But, I was surprised that so few projects actually involved the use of kites, since kites are cheap, and if something goes wrong, easily replaced. Even Makani used two rigid body vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) drones, and instead of leveraging the tensile force in the cable directly, they instead opted to simply use the electric motors in the drone to act as brakes, like an electric or hybrid car does. It’s an interesting idea, but when I was an undergrad, I'd spent some time studying flapping wing fliers (ornithopters), and learned that vortices can generate some much more powerful lift forces than what you can get with a simple airfoil moving in a straight line or what you get from a propeller, and when you learn to kitesurf, one of the first lessons is flying a figure 8 pattern. You start feeling some much more intense impulses of force during these maneuvers, and I wouldn't be surprised to learn there are some vortices at play somehow caused by the kite's complex pattern. Plus, motors are really heavy, and if you want to generate serious power, you need serious motors. Which means these drones Makani must be using must be rather big, and likely expensive. Overall, I wasn’t really sold on the concept. Putting all that weight up in the air, along with all the added cost and complexity of a set of VTOL drones seemed both expensive, and risky. Why not put the expensive stuff on the ground, or in a buoy out at sea, where it’s relatively safe from a squall?

I decided to see what I could do with the problem, mostly as a hobby. I bought a 3D printer, figured out how to build load bearing components using a combination of 3d printed parts, metal plates, and threaded rod, and got to work. A few years later, I had a kite control system that I felt pretty good about. I then started working on the next phase. I welded up a steel frame, threw a flywheel on it, and rigged up a control system for the ground station. I started thinking about patents, and spoke with a lawyer. And then, I made a bit of a soul crushing discovery. I found a project at a university in the Netherlands had built something similar. They didn’t have a patent, but they had enough information about it online that it could be considered public domain information. Therefore my ability to get any intellectual property protection didn’t seem that promising, and without that protection, I wasn’t willing to risk taking it to market. So I threw that idea on the backburner, and went back to the drawing board. I still thought there might be some potential there, but I needed a break.

Now, in the years since I’d shuttered Varna, Machine Learning had really taken off. It seemed like every magazine I picked up and journal article I read was referencing some sort of new algorithm. I’d learned a lot about optimization and modeling in general both in grad school, and at my job with VisiTech, and one of my roommates in graduate school was an early adopter of neural networks, so while I hadn’t yet used one in a project, I was familiar with the concept. And this all sounded right up my alley. So, I decided to start learning more. I found the wealth of information about the subject to be utterly amazing. Back when I was in college, the only place to learn anything meaningful about a complex subject such as this was a college textbook, or journal articles you could only access via a university library. But now, you could take the entire Stanford University Computer Science 229 course on Machine Learning for free via [Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning), taught by the world-renowned Andrew Ng. And that wasn’t all. [Google Deepmind](https://deepmind.com/), who is far and away the biggest leader in the field of AI, put out [an entire graduate level course on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2pWv7GOvuf0) taught by none other than David Silver. And the [textbook](http://incompleteideas.net/book/bookdraft2017nov5.pdf) to go with it could be downloaded for free! And you could find code samples all over GitHub. Clearly, this is a very different era, and the timing of all this couldn’t be better for my own goals.

So I gobbled up everything I could, started applying these algorithms to my own set of problems, and quickly, as I think most people who learn about machine learning’s ability to control complex tasks do, started thinking about how I could use this to manage my stock portfolio. Well, my first stop was my good friend who’d been successfully trading stocks since college. I picked his brain, learned about news sentiment analysis, and built my own custom OpenAI environment for stock trading based both on some of the concepts he’d taught me, and concepts like momentum trading and value investing that I’d learned on via  [Investopia](https://www.investopedia.com/), yet another awesome web resource. 

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/sloane.jpg" %}
I was around this time that two major, world changing events happened in my life. First, my daughter was born. Suddenly, I started feeling a need to stop living for myself, and start doing things to give her the best future I could. I also wanted to be a role model for her. My whole outlook changed.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/mom.jpg" %}
Then, the other major event happened. My mother died. She never told me, but when I was in college, she’d been diagnosed with breast cancer, and had undergone surgery. My mother was always trying to protect me from things she thought would hurt me, which was both frustrating and endearing. She had been such a huge part of my life and certainly the main reason why I had been such a good student as a kid. I remember her helping me study for countless tests, and making sure that after dinner, I always sat down to do my homework. And she always pushed the arts on me… pushing me to learn the violin at a young age, which I was far from happy about initially, but which would eventually culminate in me becoming first chair of my high school orchestra and obtaining my earliest states of meditation in life, which I’m certain helped me to develop cognitive skills. She encouraged painting and drawing, as she herself was both an amateur artist and a professional teacher. My mother also taught me about being kind to others, or at least to try to have sympathy for those in need. Much of her experience was as a special ed teacher, helping those with the greatest need. Her death hit me pretty hard, especially since I had no idea how sick she was until she was put into hospice care and given a couple weeks to live. But, I was able to say goodbye, which is a gift not many are given.

These two events gave me a whole new purpose in life. Suddenly, I felt a real need to make the most of my situation. Life is short, and I had been granted a lot of opportunities that not many get. I had a world class education, an ability to learn complex concepts, a strong work ethic, and perhaps most importantly (and thanks to my mom), a creative mind. I dove into developing my algorithm completely and started to make some big breakthroughs. But, I quickly realized that if I really wanted to make this work, I’d need to work on it full-time. 

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/openai.jpg" %}
So with my new perspective on life, I quit my job, and dove in headfirst. I negotiated a contract with a proprietary trading firm (though I would wait to sign until I was ready to start live trading), and entered the terms into my OpenAI environment. A year or so later, and I was right at the brink of making something workable. In back testing, my algorithm was making tons of money, but it was streaky… too streaky. Some months would make massive gains, others massive losses, but it was net profitable, and close to beating the market, which was a benchmark nobody had yet hit, at least long term. But, the problem was working with leveraged funds, which I would need to use to make up for the money lost to commissions. If my algorithm started off on one of its losing streaks, which was unlikely, but still a very real possibility, I’d quickly be wiped out. I had to figure out a way to make this work, or this would be my second great failure.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/alpaca.jpg" %}
Enter [Alpaca](https://alpaca.markets/), a Silicon Valley startup specifically targeting people like me; namely, those developing their own proprietary algorithms to trade stocks. Their commission-free set-up was a total game changer, and now suddenly my back testing was showing real promise. I’m currently finalizing my algorithm and entering live testing, with the expectation of being able to trade with real money by the end of Q3 2019. 

Now that I had my issues with my trading system more or less sorted out, I felt pretty good. But, all of sudden found myself with something I hadn’t had in years; spare time. I decided to do two things. First, I needed to get myself back in shape. I’ve always prioritized physical fitness, at least since my late twenties when my youthful metabolism started to fade and I found myself gaining weight and getting winded climbing just a few flights of stairs. But, I’d been reading a lot about how physical fitness can also increase cognitive function, and my mind has always been my greatest resource. I dove full into Muay Thai.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="right" src="/images/thai.jpg" %}
I’ve been into martial arts for most of my adult life. I spent several years floating from one form to the next. I tried Jeet Kune Do (Bruce Lee’s creation), Jow Ga Kung Fu, Jujitsu, MMA, Panantukan (Filipino boxing), Kali, and traditional western boxing. But my ultimate favorite, and the one I keep coming back to, has always been Muay Thai. It’s pure striking… one of the best cardio workouts you can find, and it’s all about nuance. You can either pay as much or as little attention as you want during a given class; either trying to tighten up your form, or just zoning out and going for a nice workout. It’s simple, but it takes years, if not a lifetime to master, and unlike the more combat oriented martial arts like Krav Maga, it’s a sport so you can spar with it with little physical risk. I mean it’s not risk free… I actually broke my nose not too long ago sparring, but you’re not going to come out of a sparring match with an experienced partner with a broken knee or missing eye. And when you finally reach a certain level of skill, sparring becomes a complete Zen experience… almost like being in a martial arts movie. There’s a flow to it and a kind of feeling of Zen that makes me almost giddy. I can’t remember ever having as much fun doing anything else in my life. Things like video games just seem so boring in comparison.

{% include post_picwrap.html pos="left" src="/images/youtube.jpg" %}
The second thing I decided to do was to create a YouTube series. Even though I’d finally succeeded with making an algorithm that can trade stocks, I could hardly share that code. If that code got in the wrong hands (especially my trained weights file), it could easily be used by a well-funded nefarious trader to identify my moves and milk me dry. But I do want to share some of the biggest lessons I learned in writing it to put a hand back, so to speak, to those still learning the ropes. I’d received so much from this Open Source movement that not doing that just felt wrong somehow. So, I decided I would create a series that uses several of the same principles I used in my algorithm to solve another problem; namely, predicting the track of hurricanes. I figured this would be a win / win. I could help fill in some of the gaps I found in the other online courses I’d audited while also helping to save lives by advancing the science of forecasting these storms, even if it is just by a small amount.

And that catches us up to today. I’ve had a pretty exciting career, and as I continue to learn, I’m hoping I can use this new YouTube station and GitHub site to help those who follow in my path. My intention is to keep producing these videos for as long as I have time to do so. Please do check them out.




